CAN WE SURVIVE TECHNOLOGY?

by John von Neumann
Member, Atomic Energy Commission

"The great globe itself" is in a rapidly maturing crisis
—a crisis attributable to the fact that the environment
in which technological progress must occur has become
both undersized and underorganized. To define the crisis
with any accuracy, and to explore possibilities of dealing
with it, we must not only look at relevant facts, but also
engage in some speculation. The process will illuminate
some potential technological developments of the next
quarter-century.
In the first half of this century the accelerating indus­
trial revolution encountered an absolute limitation—not
on technological progress as such but on an essential
safety factor. This safety factor, which had permitted
the industrial revolution to roll on from t h e mideighteenth to the early twentieth century, was essentially
a matter of geographical and political Lebensraum: an
ever broader geographical scope for technological activi
ties, combined with an ever broader political integration
of the world. Within this expanding framework it was
possible to accommodate the major tensions created by
technological progress.
Now this safety mechanism is being sharply inhibited;
literally and figuratively, we are running out of room.
At long last, we begin to feel the effects of the finite,
actual size of the earth in a critical way.
Thus the crisis does not arise from accidental events
or human errors. It is inherent in technology's relation
to geography on the one hand and to political organiza­
tion on the other. The crisis was developing visibly in
the 1940's, and some phases can be traced back to 1914.
In the years between now and 1980 the crisis will prob­
ably develop far beyond all earlier patterns. When or
how it will end—or to what state of affairs it will yield
—nobody can say.

Dangers—present and coming
In all its stages the industrial revolution consisted of
making available more and cheaper energy, more and
easier controls of human actions and reactions, and more
and faster communications. Each development increased
the effectiveness of the other two. All three factors in­
creased the speed of performing large-scale operations
—-industrial, mercantile, political, and migratory. But
throughout the development, increased speed did not
so much shorten time requirements of processes as ex­
tend the areas of the earth affected by them. The reason
is clear. Since most time scales are fixed by human re­
action times, habits, and other physiological and psycho­
logical factors, the effect of the increased speed of
technological processes was to enlarge the size of units

— political, organizational, economic, and cultural —
affected by technological operations. That is, instead of
performing the same operations as before in less time,
now larger-scale operations were performed in the same
time. This important evolution has a natural limit, that
of the earth's actual size. The limit is now being reached,
or at least closely approached.
Indications of this appeared early and with dramatic
force in the military sphere. By 1940 even the larger
countries^ of continental Western Europe were inade­
quate as military units. Only Russia could sustain a
major military reverse without collapsing. Since 1945,
improved aeronautics and communications alone might
have sufficed to make any geographical unit, including
Russia, inadequate in a future war. The advent of nuclear
weapons merely climaxes the development. Now the
effectiveness of offensive weapons is such as to stultify
all plausible defensive time scales. As early as World
War I, it was observed that the admiral commanding
the battle fleet could "lose the British Empire in one
afternoon/' Yet navies of that epoch were relatively
stable entities, tolerably safe against technological sur­
prises. Today there is every reason to fear that even
minor inventions and feints in the field of nuclear
weapons can be decisive in less time than would be re­
quired to devise specific countermeasures. Soon existing
nations will be as unstable in war as a nation the size
of Manhattan Island would have been in a contest fought
with the weapons of 1900.
Such military instability has already found its political
expression. Two superpowers, the U.S. and U.S.S.R.,
represent such enormous destructive potentials as to
afford little chance of a purely passive equilibrium. Other
countries, including possible "neutrals," are militarily


defenseless in the ordinary sense. At best they will ac­
quire destructive capabilities of their own, as Britain
is now doing. Consequently, the "concert of powers"—
or its equivalent international organization—rests on a
basis much more fragile than ever before. The situation
is further embroiled by the newly achieved political
effectiveness of non-European nationalisms.
These factors would "normally"—that is, in any re­
cent century—have led to war. Will they lead to war
before 1980? Or soon thereafter? It would be presump­
tuous to try to answer such a question firmly. In any
case, the present and the near future are both dangerous.
While the immediate problem is to cope with the actual
danger, it is also essential to envisage how the problem is
going to evolve in the 1955-80 period, even assuming
that all will go reasonably well for the moment. This
does not mean belittling immediate problems of weap­
onry, of U.S.-U.S.S.R. tensions, of the evolution and
revolutions of Asia. These first things must come first.
But we must be ready for the follow-up, lest possible
immediate successes prove futile. We must think beyond
the present forms of problems to those of later decades.

When reactors grow up
Technological evolution is still accelerating. Technol­
ogies are always constructive and beneficial, directly or
indirectly. Yet their consequences tend to increase in­
stability—a point that will get closer attention after we
have had a look at certain aspects of continuing tech­
nological evolution.
First of all, there is a rapidly expanding supply of
energy. It is generally agreed that even conventional,
chemical fuel—coal or oil—will be available in increased


quantity in the next two decades. Increasing demand
tends to keep fuel prices high, yet improvements in
methods of generation seem to bring the price of power
down. There is little doubt that the most significant
event affecting energy is the advent of nuclear power.
Its only available controlled source today is the nuclearfission reactor. Reactor techniques appear to be ap­
proaching a condition in which they will be competitive
with conventional (chemical) power sources within the
U.S.; however, because of generally higher fuel prices
abroad, they could already be more than competitive in
many important foreign areas. Yet reactor technology
is but a decade and a half old, during most of which
period effort has been directed primarily not toward
power but toward plutonium production. Given a decade
of really large-scale industrial effort, the economic
characteristics of reactors will undoubtedly surpass
those of the present by far.
Moreover, it is not a law of nature that all controlled
release of nuclear energy should be tied to fission reac­
tions as it has been thus far. It is true that nuclearenergy appears to be the primary source of practically
all energy now visible in nature. Furthermore, it is not
surprising that the first break into the intranuclear do­
main occurred at the unstable "high end" of the system
of nuclei (that is, by fission). Yet fission is not nature's
normal way of releasing nuclear energy. In the long run,
systematic industrial exploitation of nuclear energy may
shift reliance onto other and still more abundant modes.
Again, reactors have been bound thus far to the tradi­
tional heat-steam-generator-electricity cycle, just as
automobiles were at first constructed to look like buggies.
It is likely that we shall gradually develop procedures
more naturally and effectively adjusted to the new source


of energy, abandoning the conventional kinks and de­
tours inherited from chemical-fuel processes. Conse­
quently, a few decades hence energy may be free—just
like the unmetered air—with coal and oil used mainly
as raw materials for organic chemical synthesis, to
which, as experience has shown, their properties are
best suited.

"Alchemy" and automation
It is worth emphasizing that the main trend will be
systematic exploration of nuclear reactions—that is, the
transmutation of elements, or alchemy rather than
chemistry. The main point in developing the industrial
use of nuclear processes is to make them suitable for
large-scale exploitation on the relatively small site that
is the earth or, rather, any plausible terrestrial indus­
trial establishment. Nature has, of course, been operat­
ing nuclear processes all along, well and massively, but
her "natural" sites for this industry are entire stars.
There is reason to believe that the minimum space re­
quirements for her way of operating are the minimum
sizes of stars. Forced by the limitations of our real
estate, we must in this respect do much better than
nature. That this may not be impossible has been demon­
strated in the somewhat extreme and unnatural instance
of fission, that remarkable breakthrough of the past
decade.
What massive transmutation of elements will do to
technology in general is hard to imagine, but the effects
will be radical indeed. This can already be sensed in
related fields. The general revolution clearly under way
in the military sphere, and its already realized special
aspect, the terrible possibilities of mass destruction,


should not be viewed as typical of what the nuclear
revolution stands for. Yet they may well be typical of
how deeply that revolution will transform whatever it
touches. And the revolution will probably touch most
things technological.
Also likely to evolve fast—and quite apart from nu­
clear evolution—is automation. Interesting analyses of
recent developments in this field, and of near-future
potentialities, have appeared in the last few years. Auto­
matic control, of course, is as old as the industrial revolu­
tion, for the decisive new feature of Watt's steam
engine was its automatic valve control, including speed
control by a "governor." In our century, however, small
electric amplifying and switching devices put automa­
tion on an entirely new footing. This development began
with the electromechanical (telephone) relay, continued
and unfolded with the vacuum tube, and appears to ac­
celerate with various solid-state devices (semi-conductor
crystals, ferromagnetic cores, etc.). The last decade or
two has also witnessed an increasing ability to control
and "discipline" large numbers of such devices within
one machine. Even in an airplane the number of vacuum
tubes now approaches or exceeds a thousand. Other
machines, containing up to 10,000 vacuum tubes, up to
five times more crystals, and possibly more than 100,000
cores, now operate faultlessly over long periods, per­
forming many millions of regulated, preplanned actions
per second, with an expectation of only a few errors per
day or week.
Many such machines have been built to perform com­
plicated scientific and engineering calculations and largescale accounting and logistical surveys. There is no
doubt that they will be used for elaborate industrial
process control, logistical, economic, and other planning,

and many other purposes heretofore lying entirely out­
side the compass of quantitative and automatic control
and preplanning. Thanks to simplified forms of auto­
matic or semi-automatic control, the efficiency of some
important branches of industry has increased consider­
ably during recent decades. It is therefore to be expected
that the considerably elaborated newer forms, now be­
coming increasingly available, will effect much more
along these lines.
Fundamentally, improvements in control are really
improvements in communicating information within an
organization or mechanism. The sum total of progress
in this sphere is explosive. Improvements in communica­
tion in its direct, physical sense—transportation—while
less dramatic, have been considerable and steady. If
nuclear developments make energy unrestrictedly avail­
able, transportation developments are likely to accelerate
even more. But even "normal" progress in sea, land, and
air media is extremely important. Just such "normal"
progress molded the world's economic development, pro­
ducing the present global ideas in politics and economics.

Controlled climate
Let us now consider a thoroughly "abnormal" indus­
try and its potentialities—that is, an industry as yet
without a place in any list of major activities: the con­
trol of weather or, to use a more ambitious but justified
term, climate. One phase of this activity that has re­
ceived a good deal of public attention is "rain making."
The present technique assumes extensive rain clouds, and
forces precipitation by applying small amounts of chemi­
cal agents. While it is not easy to evaluate the signifi­
cance of the efforts made thus far, the evidence seems to
indicate that the aim is an attainable one.



But weather control and climate control are really
much broader than rain making. All major weather
phenomena, as well as climate as such, are ultimately
controlled by the solar energy that falls on the earth. To
modify the amount of solar energy, is, of course, beyond
human power. But what really matters is not the amount
that hits the earth, but the fraction retained by the
earth, since that reflected back into space is no more use­
ful than if it had never arrived. Now, the amount ab­
sorbed by the solid earth, the sea, or the atmosphere
seems to be subject to delicate influences. True, none of
these has so far been substantially controlled by human
will, but there are strong indications of control possibili­
ties.
The carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere by
industry's burning of coal and oil-—more than half of it
during the last generation—may have changed the at­
mosphere's composition sufficiently to account for a
general warming of the world by about one degree
Fahrenheit. The volcano Krakatao erupted in 1883 and
released an amount of energy by no means exorbitant.
Had the dust of the eruption stayed in the stratosphere
for fifteen years, reflecting sunlight away from the earth,
it might have sufficed to lower the world's temperature
by six degrees (in fact, it stayed for about three years,
and five such eruptions would probably have achieved
the result mentioned). This would have been a substan­
tial cooling; the last Ice Age, when half of North
America and all of northern and western Europe were
under an ice cap like that of Greenland or Antarctica,
was only fifteen degrees colder than the present age. On
the other hand, another fifteen degrees of warming
would probably melt the ice of Greenland and Antarctica
and produce world-wide tropical to semi-tropical climate.


"Rather fantastic effects"
Furthermore, it is known that the persistence of large
ice fields is due to the fact that ice both reflects sunlight
energy and radiates away terrestrial energy at an even
higher rate than ordinary soil. Microscopic layers of col­
ored matter spread on an icy surface, or in the atmos­
phere above one, could inhibit the reflection-radiation
process, melt the ice, and change the local climate. Meas­
ures that would effect such changes are technically pos­
sible, and the amount of investment required would be
only of the order of magnitude that sufficed to develop
rail systems and other major industries. The main dif­
ficulty lies in predicting in detail the effects of any such
drastic intervention. But our knowledge of the dynamics
and the controlling processes in the atmosphere is
rapidly approaching a level that would permit such pre­
diction. Probably intervention in atmospheric and clima­
tic matters will come in a few decades, and will unfold
on a scale difficult to imagine at present.
What could be done, of course, is no index to what
should be done; to make a new ice age in order to annoy
others, or a new tropical, "interglacial" age in order to
please everybody, is not necessarily a rational program.
In fact, to evaluate the ultimate consequences of either
a general cooling or a general heating would be a com­
plex matter. Changes would affect the level of the seas,
and hence the habitability of the continental coastal
shelves; the evaporation of the seas, and hence general
precipitation and glaciation levels; and so on. What
would be harmful and what beneficial—and to which re­
gions of the earth — is not immediately obvious. But
there is little doubt that one could carry out analyses
needed to predict results, intervene on any desired scale,
and ultimately achieve rather fantastic effects. The


climate of specific regions and levels of precipitation
might be altered. For example, temporary disturbances
—including invasions of cold (polar) air that constitute
the typical winter of the middle latitudes, and tropical
storms (hurricanes) —might be corrected or at least
depressed.
There is no need to detail what such things would
mean to agriculture or, indeed, to all phases of human,
animal, and plant ecology. What power over our environ­
ment, over all nature, is implied!
Such actions would be more directly and truly world­
wide than recent or, presumably, future wars, or than
the economy at any time. Extensive human intervention
would deeply affect the atmosphere's general circulation,
which depends on the earth's rotation and intensive solar
heating of the tropics. Measures in the arctic may con­
trol the weather in temperate regions, or measures in
one temperate region critically affect another, onequarter around the globe. All this will merge each na­
tion's affairs with those of every other, more thoroughly
than the threat of a nuclear or any other war may
already have done.

The indifferent controls
Such developments as free energy, greater automa­
tion, improved communications, partial or total climate
control have common traits deserving special mention.
First, though all are intrinsically useful, they can lend
themselves to destruction. Even the most formidable
tools of nuclear destruction are only extreme members of
a genus that includes useful methods of energy release
or element t r a n s m u t a t i o n . The most constructive
schemes for climate control would have to be based on


insights and techniques that would also lend themselves
to forms of climatic warfare as yet unimagined. Tech­
nology—like science—is neutral all through, providing
only means of control applicable to any purpose, indif­
ferent to all.
Second, there is in most of these developments a trend
toward affecting the earth as a whole, or to be more
exact, toward producing effects that can be projected
from any one to any other point on the earth. There is
an intrinsic conflict with geography — and institutions
based thereon — as understood today. Of course, any
technology interacts with geography, and each imposes
its own geographical rules and modalities. The tech­
nology that is now developing and that will dominate the
next decades seems to be in total conflict with traditional
and, in the main, momentarily still valid, geographical
and political units and concepts. This is the maturing
crisis of technology.
What kind of action does this situation call for? Whatever one feels inclined to do, one decisive trait must be
considered: the very techniques that create the dangers
and the instabilities are in themselves useful, or closely
related to the useful. In fact, the more useful they could
be, the more unstabilizing their effects can also be. It is
not a particular perverse destructiveness of one par­
ticular invention that creates danger. Technological
power, technological efficiency as such, is an ambivalent
achievement. Its danger is intrinsic.

Science the indivisible
In looking for a solution, it is well to exclude one
pseudosolution at the start. The crisis will not be re­
solved by inhibiting this or that apparently particularly


obnoxious form of technology. For one thing, the parts
of technology, as well as of the underlying sciences, are
so intertwined that in the long run nothing less than a
total elimination of all technological progress would
suffice for inhibition. Also, on a more pedestrian and
immediate basis, useful and harmful techniques lie
everywhere so close together that it is never possible to
separate the lions from the lambs. This is known to all
who have so laboriously tried to separate secret, "classi­
fied" science or technology (military) from the "open"
kind; success is never more—nor intended to be more—
than transient, lasting perhaps half a decade. Similarly,
a separation into useful and harmful subjects in any
technological sphere would probably diffuse into nothing
in a decade.
Moreover, in this case successful separation would
have to be enduring (unlike the case of military "classi­
fication," in which even a few years' gain may be im­
portant) . Also, the proximity of useful techniques to
harmful ones, and the possibility of putting the harmful
ones to military use, puts a competitive premium on in­
fringement. Hence the banning of particular technologies
would have to be enforced on a worldwide basis. But the
only authority that could do this effectively would have
to be of such scope and perfection as to signal the resolution of international problems rather than the discovery
of a means to resolve them.
Finally and, I believe, most importantly, prohibition
of technology (invention and development, which are
hardly separable from underlying scientific inquiry), is
contrary to the whole ethos of the industrial age. It is
irreconcilable with a major mode of intellectuality as
our age understands it. It is hard to imagine such a re­straint successfully imposed in our civilization. Only if



those disasters that we fear had already occurred, only
if humanity were already completely disillusioned about
technological civilization, could such a step be taken.
But not even the disasters of recent wars have produced
that degree of disillusionment, as is proved by the
phenomenal resiliency with which the industrial way of
life recovered even—or particularly—in the worst-hit
areas. The techilological system retains enormous vi­
tality, probably more than ever before, and the counsel
of restraint is unlikely to be heeded.

Survival—a possibility
A much more satisfactory solution than technological
prohibition would be eliminating war as "a means of
national policy." The desire to do this is as old as any
part of the ethical system by which we profess to be
governed. The intensity of the sentiment fluctuates, in­
creasing greatly after major wars. How strong is it now
and is it on the up or the downgrade? It is certainly
strong, for practical as well as for emotional reasons,
all quite obvious. At least in individuals, it seems world­
wide, transcending differences of political systems. Yet
in evaluating its durability and effectiveness a certain
caution is justified.
One can hardly quarrel with the "practical" argu­
ments against war, but the emotional factors are prob­
ably less stable. Memories of the 1939-45 war are fresh,
but it is not easy to estimate what will happen to popu­
lar sentiment as they recede. The revulsion that followed
1914-18 did not stand up twenty years later under the
strain of a serious political crisis. The elements of a
future international conflict are clearly present today
and even more explicit than after 1914-18. Whether the

" p r a c t i c a l " considerations, without the emotional
counterpart, will suffice to restrain the human species is
dubious since the past record is so spotty. True, "prac­
tical" reasons are stronger than ever before, since war
could be vastly more destructive than formerly. But that
very appearance has been observed several times in the
past without being decisive. True, this time the danger
of destruction seems to be real rather than apparent,
but there is no guarantee that a real danger can control
human actions better than a convincing appearance of
danger.
What safeguard remains? Apparently only day-to-day
— or perhaps year-to-year — opportunistic measures, a
long sequence of small, correct decisions. And this is not
surprising. After all, the crisis is due to the rapidity of
progress, to the probable further acceleration thereof,
and to the reaching of certain critical relationships.
Specifically, the effects that we are now beginning to
produce are of the same order of magnitude as that of
"the great globe itself." Indeed, they affect the earth as
an entity. Hence further acceleration can no longer be
absorbed as in the past by an extension of the area of
operations. Under present conditions it is unreasonable
to expect a novel cure-all.
For progress there is no cure. Any attempt to find
automatically safe channels for the present explosive
variety of progress must lead to frustration. The only
safety possible is relative, and it lies in an intelligent ex­ercise of day-to-day judgment.

Awful and more awful
The problems created by the combination of the pre­sently possible forms of nuclear warfare and the rather

unusually unstable international situation are formid­
able and not to be solved easily. Those of the next de­
cades are likely to be similarly vexing, "only more so."
The U.S.-U.S.S.R. tension is bad, but when other nations
begin to make felt their full offensive potential weight,
things will not become simpler.
Present awful possibilities of nuclear warfare may
give way to others even more awful. After global climate
control becomes possible, perhaps all our present involve­ments will seem simple. We should not deceive ourselves:
once such possibilities become actual, they will be ex­ploited. It will, therefore, be necessary to develop suit­
able new political forms and procedures. All experience
shows that even smaller technological changes than
those now in the cards profoundly transform political
and social relationships. Experience also shows that
these transformations are not a priori predictable and
that most contemporary "first guesses" concerning them
are wrong. For all these reasons, one should take neither
present difficulties nor presently proposed reforms too
seriously.
The one solid fact is that the difficulties are due to an
evolution that, while useful and constructive, is also
dangerous. Can we produce the required adjustments
with the necessary speed? The most hopeful answer is
that the human species has been subjected to similar
tests before and seems to have a congenital ability to
come through, after varying amounts of trouble. To
ask in advance for a complete recipe would be unreason­
able. We can specify only the human qualities required:
patience, flexibility, intelligence.






